# The Force

*Pages 173–184 (PDF)*

<!-- page 174 -->

The Force is an energy field generated by all living things. It surrounds and penetrates everything, binding the galaxy together. There are two sides to the Force. Peace, serenity, and knowledge form the light side, while the dark side consists of aggression, anger, and fear. The universe is a place of balance: life and death, creation and destruction, love and hate. As such, both sides of the Force are part of the natural order. There are some beings attuned to the Force. Whether they understand it or not, they can feel the Force flowing through them. Of those that are sensitive to the Force, beings that study its ways can learn to manipulate its energy. The Jedi fall into this category, using their knowledge of the Force to give them their powers. But theirs is not the only Forceusing tradition. The Sith, the Nightsisters of Dathomir, and others embrace the dark side of the Force, while a variety of alien cultures, such as Ewok shamans and Ithorian ecopriests, call the light side of the Force by different names. Understanding of the Force manifests in many ways.

## What's New?

If you don’t have the previous edition of the Star Wars Roleplaying Game, you can skip this section. It explains what we changed in this chapter for the new edition.

In this chapter, we've made a few adjustments and clarifications based on player feedback. We made a change in when you declare the use of a Force Point to make Force Points more useful. Finally, we expanded the discussion on the dark side of the Force to provide more details and information on when characters gain Dark Side Points and what such accumulation means to them.

## The Force through the Ages

For most of the history of the Republic, the Jedi were looked upon as defenders and protectors of justice. By their example, belief in the Force was accepted if not always understood. Most beings could not perceive the Force directly; they could only see it manifest in those attuned to it, such as the Jedi. At times over the years, the dark side came to the forefront, such as during the ancient Sith Wars, but in general the champions of the light side helped keep the galactic peace.

If your campaign is set in the Episode | or Episode Il time period, then the Force is a powerful component of everyday life. The Jedi are visible, active proponents of the Force. Regardless of what an individual may believe about the Force, it’s hard to deny the power demonstrated by the Jedi.

Later, in the wake of the destruction of the Jedi Order and the rise of the Empire, the Force came to be looked upon as an arcane religion practiced by misguided fools. The Empire outlawed the Jedi and attempted to stamp out anyone who demonstrated affinity for the Force, thus driving Force-users from the day-to-day workings of the galaxy.

If your campaign is set in the Episode IV to Episode VI time period, the Force has faded from common knowledge. Those who can manipulate the Force keep their skills hidden to avoid the notice of the Empire. Even members of the Imperial hierarchy, despite the presence of Darth Vader, consider the Force to be outdated and insignificant

<!-- page 175 -->

compared to the military might of the Empire. In many ways, that’s just how the Emperor wants it. Even the Emperor, one of the most powerful Force-users in the galaxy, keeps his Force abilities secret from the general public and most of his subordinates. The few Force-users that exist during this period are either hiding from the Empire, working for the Empire, or trying to ignore the presence of the Force. The Rebel Alliance has begun to use the Force as a rallying cry, adopting the Jedi salutation, “May the Force be with you,” as its own. Because of this, the few Force-sensitive beings that can actually use the Force begin to reach out to the Alliance. And, of course, Luke Skywalker begins his training during this time,

If your campaign is set in The New Jedi Order era, the Force has regained a place in everyday society and a new fellowship of Jedi has come to prominence under the tutelage of Luke Skywalker. Many beings in the New Republic, however, harbor varying degrees of mistrust and fear toward Force-users. These negative feelings are due, in part, to the actions of a few rogue Jedi who have taken the law into their own hands and have begun to rebel against Luke Skywalker’s leadership. The memories of a host of darksiders that plagued the galaxy since the time of Darth Vader and the Emperor add fuel to the fire of fear, and the political machinations of members of the Republic Council have begun to fan these flames. Force-users of this period, then, are finding that acceptance of the Force among the general population may turn into a bad thing—at least as far as they are concerned. Tensions are already high, as this era is marked by the invasion of the Yuuzhan Vong.

Even those who don’t believe in the Force and aren’t particularly attuned to its flow can call upon the Force without understanding exactly what they are doing. When a stroke of amazing luck occurs, or fate seems to be on your side and helps you accomplish a difficult objective, it could be the Force coming to your aid. In game terms, the expenditure of Force Points by non-Force-using characters represents this unconscious, tenuous connection to the Force that all living beings share. When a Force-using char acter calls on the Force in this way, he or she knows exactly what's happening and gets a more impressive boost because of it. (See Force Points, page 179.)

The most prominent and well-known Force-users in the galaxy are the Jedi, But the Jedi are not the only ones who have learned to manipulate the Force. These others sometimes attribute their abilities to sources other than the Force, such as magic or gods, but they are all using the energy to manipulate the world around them. In game terms, anyone with the Force-Sensitive feat has the ability to learn Force skills and feats, though many of these beings will never go down this particular path.

Other Force-using traditions include the various dark side cults including the Sith, and obscure, isolated sects such as the Witches of Dathomir and the Sorcerers of Tund. Some know the Force for what it is but approach its use in a different way from the Jedi. Others know the Force by a different name, Either way, it remains the mystic energy that binds the galaxy together and gives Force-users their powers,

## Disturbances in the Force

All life shines in the Force, very much the way gravity wells in realspace are reflected in hyperspace. A single person not particularly attuned to the Force flickers like a candle in the night, making but the slightest impression in the Force. A Force-user shines more brightly, especially when manipulating the Force. Each time a Force-user calls upon the Force, a slight tremor ripples through it that can be perceived by other Force-users, Used sparingly and in harmony with the natural balance, such ripples can barely be detected. When a user constantly calls upon the Force to alter the world around him, the ripples become quakes that can be felt at great distances. Such quakes attract attention, making those who have less refined control over the Force or who rely on the Force too frequently the target of more powerful Forceusers. It is believed that through such methods the Empire was able to hunt down stray Force-users in the years leading up to the Galactic Civil War.

## The Jedi

There is no emotion; there is peace. There is no ignorance; there is knowledge. There is no passion; there is serenity. There is no death; there is the Force.

—from The Jedi Code

<!-- page 176 -->

> **The Jedi and the Lightsaber**
>
> There's a special significance in the Jedi's choice of weapon. The ancient lightsaber, an elegant melee weapon, has come to be seen as a symbol of the Jedi. Few outside their ranks even attempt to use these weapons, let alone demonstrate mastery with them.
>
> Every Jedi is trained to use a lightsaber as part of his or her mastery of the Force; the weapon's energy blade helps the Jedi focus and attune himself to the Force. The Jedi apprentice's mentor provides the student's first lightsaber. Later, as part of the apprentice's training, the student must craft his or her own lightsaber. This is as much a test of mechanical aptitude as it is a test of discipline and one's connection to the Force. There are a few ways to handle this activity in the game.
>
> The GM can decide to let the construction of a Jedi's personal lightsaber occur off-camera, between game sessions when a Jedi achieves a new level. The construction of a lightsaber can be the culmination of an epic quest, taking one or more adventures to accomplish. While a Jedi's friends can help with many parts of the quest, the Jedi must accomplish the final stages of construction alone. Luke Skywalker, for example, built his lightsaber in the desert near Ben Kenobi's home, with only R2-D2 on hand to keep him company.
>
> When you allow your Jedi characters to craft their own lightsabers, whether you make the event an adventure or something that occurs between game sessions, use the following guidelines.
>
> First, a Jedi must possess the three basic Force feats (Control, Sense, and Alter).
>
> Second, the Jedi's mentor must declare that the apprentice is ready to undergo the test of the lightsaber. Some apprentices can try to build their own lightsabers as early as 1st level, while others wait until 6th level to attempt the complicated procedure. In any event, the test must occur before the Jedi reaches 7th level.
>
> Third, the Jedi must gather the parts needed to make a lightsaber. These include the following components: power cell, handgrip, activation plate, safety, belt ring, blade-length adjuster, emitter matrix, recharge socket, lens assembly, power conduit, and focusing crystals (usually one to three). The most commonly used crystal is the Adegan, though other types can be used.
>
> Fourth, the Jedi must prepare the crystals, meditating and imbuing them with the Force. This task takes some amount of time and the expenditure of a Force Point. To successfully prepare the crystals, the Jedi makes three ability checks: A Constitution check (for Control) to harmonize the self (DC 20), a Wisdom check (for Sense) to harmonize the Force (DC 20), and an Intelligence check (for Alter) to harmonize and imbue the crystals (DC 20). Each day spent in doing nothing but meditating before making the checks reduces one check's DC by 1. No DC can be reduced to less than 10, so spending a month in meditation (30 days) reduces each check's DC to 10. The checks may be attempted in any order, but are made at the same time. If any check fails, the process must begin again. If all of the checks succeed, the Jedi becomes stronger in the Force; the Jedi receives 2 Force Points.
>
> After achieving success on all three ability checks, the Jedi makes a Craft (lightsaber) check to see if he or she correctly performs the final steps in the assembly of the weapon. The check can be made untrained if the Jedi doesn't possess the Craft (lightsaber) skill. The DC depends on the Jedi's level: DC 30 for 1st or 2nd level, DC 25 for 3rd level, DC 20 for 4th level, DC 15 for 5th level, or DC 10 for 6th level.
>
> If the Jedi fails this Craft check, he or she must correct the problems before trying to assemble the lightsaber again. Doing this takes a number of days equal to 10 minus the Jedi's level. When that time has passed, the Jedi can attempt another Craft check to finish the assembly correctly.
>
> A Jedi gains a +1 circumstance bonus on attack rolls when using a lightsaber of his or her own construction.

For centuries, the group of philosophers that would eventually become the Jedi contemplated the mysteries of the energy field known as the Force. Eventually, some of the group's members mastered the Force. After that, they dedicated themselves to using their newfound skills and powers for good, helping those in need. In the thousands of years that followed, the Jedi served as protectors of the Galactic Republic. Answering to their own Jedi council and operating in concordance with the Judicial Department of the office of the Supreme Chancellor, the Jedi became the guardians of peace and justice in the galaxy.

The Jedi, in addition to battling interstellar criminals and settling galactic disputes, served as mediators, defenders, and teachers. Because of their sense of honor and the epic challenges they undertook, the Jedi became legends, serving as symbols of the best the Republic had to offer. With lightsabers at their sides and the power of the Force flowing through them, the Jedi accomplished the tasks set before them with dedication and seeming invincibility. But invincibility was only an illusion. Jedi often died in the defense of freedom and justice.

During the Rise of the Empire era (circa Episode I or Episode II), ten thousand Jedi served the Republic and defended its vast territory. They identified potential recruits early in life, usually within the first six months of a child's existence. As infants, those attuned to the Force and accepted by the Jedi council were taken to begin their training. Older children, if identified later in life as being Force-sensitive, were refused training in most cases; the Jedi believed that the fear and anger in older children made them too susceptible to the dark side, and so it was unwise to train them. All characters playing in this era that are Jedi Padawan learners (Jedi class level 1st to 6th) have a master (Jedi class level 7th or higher). While there may be times when the master and the Padawan travel together, most of their interaction happens between adventures, while all characters are training and improving. The master is a GM character, offering training, advice, and aid when the GM feels such aid is appropriate and necessary.

During the Rebellion era, the Jedi purge has been completed. All but a handful of Force-users, let alone fully trained Jedi, have been exterminated or corrupted to the dark side and placed in the service of the Emperor. Force-sensitives, such as Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa, were placed in hiding and cut off from their heritage. More powerful Force-users, such as Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, purposely disappeared and worked to stay unnoticed. Jedi characters in this era eventually attract a teacher, though the training these masters provide is haphazard at best. A would-be Jedi learns through occasional experience, through meetings with other Force-users, and even by studying with beings who follow other Force traditions. It's not easy, which is why Jedi in this period are few and far between, and few reach the level of power exhibited in earlier or later periods.

<!-- page 177 -->

In The New Jedi Order era, Luke Skywalker has trained about one hundred Jedi and identified perhaps a dozen others to start training. Prominent Force-users such as Mara Jade Skywalker and Corran Horn help Skywalker train and coordinate the efforts of these Jedi, while promising students such as the Solo children and Ganner Rhysode show great promise for the future. Jedi characters again receive a higher-level mentor, who provides training and advice between adventures or when the Gamemaster deems such interaction to be warranted and important to a mission.

## The Jedi Code

Jedi are the guardians of peace in the galaxy.

Jedi use their powers to defend and protect, never to attack others,

Jedi respect all life, in any form.

Jedi serve others rather than ruling over them, for the good of the galaxy,

Jedi seek to improve themselves through knowledge and training.

—from The Jedi Code

The philosophy known as the Jedi Code was created to keep young Jedi students from being drawn to the dark side. It was taught by the Jedi council to hundreds of thousands of Jedi throughout the ages; Obi-Wan Kenobi and Master Yoda taught parts of it to Luke Skywalker; and Luke Skywalker passed on what he had learned to his students at the Jedi academy.

At its heart, the Jedi Code provides simple instructions for living in touch with the Force. A Jedi never uses the Force to gain wealth or personal power. Instead, a Jedi uses the Force to find knowledge and enlightenment. Anger, fear, aggression, and other negative emotions lead to the dark side, so Jedi are taught to act only when they are at peace with the Force.

Jedi are encouraged to find nonviolent solutions whenever possible. They should act from wisdom, using persuasion and counsel instead of Force powers and violence. When all else fails, or to save a life, a Jedi must sometimes resort to battle in order to resolve a particularly dangerous situation. Though combat may sometimes be the best answer, it should never be the first option a Jedi explores.

Because of their connection to the Force, the Jedi sense its flow and draw upon its energy. While doing so, a Jedi sometimes perceives disturbances in the Force. These disturbances can be explained by the presence of powerful Force-users in the area, or intense emotions that cry out in the Force, such as when the life of the planet Alderaan was extinguished by the Death Star. There are even times when such disturbances result in feelings of urgency or premonitions that spur a Jedi to a place or situation where she is needed. This aspect and manifestation of the Force is covered by the Sense feat (see page 115).

## The Teachings of Master Odan-Urr

“Certainly a Jedi should know the Code, by word and by heart. But seemingly every Jedi is in some fashion negligent, from the lowest Padawan to the highest Master. Consequently, were someone to demand, ‘What is the true meaning of the Jedi Code?’ the Jedi who promptly answered would be rare indeed.”

So begins the famous commentary upon the Jedi Code by Master Odan-Urr, written almost four thousand years before the time of Master Mace Windu. His musings on the proper behavior of a Jedi formed the foundation of the Jedi Order as it was known near the end of the Old Republic.

Odan-Urr’s ancient wisdom held true for centuries. Many were taught the Jedi Code, but few fully understood it. Fewer still lived by it. Full comprehension of the Code is one of the keys to unlocking a Jedi’s mastery of the Force.

### The Path within the Code

At its most basic level, the Jedi Code is a set of guidelines explaining what virtues to prize and what flaws to avoid. Jedi instructors ask their students to always keep these words in mind. The reason is simple: The Code provides instructions on how to become a Jedi Master.

Consider the first rule: “There is no emotion; there is peace.” It is plainly a contrast, distinguishing the confusion of emotional considerations from the clear thinking of peaceful meditation—obviously, a valuable quality.

But if that peace is rooted in simply being unaware of some factor that would otherwise cause a Jedi to feel an emotional reaction, then it is not so much peace as ignorance. This is why the Code contains the second rule: “There is no ignorance; there is knowledge.”

This teaches Jedi to strive to understand all situations— particularly before acting—to avoid errors in judgment. But knowing a thing well can lead one to become engrossed in it, An obsessive focus leads to clouding of the mind. Thus, the third rule: “There is no passion; there is serenity,” Knowing a thing objectively is knowing it as the Force knows it.

Still, students commonly argue that the only true objectivity is nonexistence—death. For does one not affect a thing even by merely observing it? This is why there is the fourth rule: “There is no death; there is the Force.” The Force knows all things objectively; it is serene, and it is not swayed by emotion.

Thus, the Jedi Code teaches that before undertaking any action, the Jedi should consider the will of the Force. Master Odan-Urr said: “With these other considerations aside, all that remains is the Force.” If a Jedi can act emotionlessly, knowledgeably, and serenely, then he or she is acting in accordance with the will of the Force.

Therefore, if a Jedi acts in all things without emotion, ignorance, or passion, then that Jedi is truly a master of the Force

## Interpreting the Code

While the Code is a straightforward map to mastery of the Force, it can sometimes be frustrating when put into practice. The galaxy has changed a great deal since the Jedi Code was first defined, and a great deal more since

<!-- page 178 -->

Master Odan-Urr attempted to clarify it. Although the secret to the Code is considering it thoroughly before acting, the universe often does not afford a Jedi the time to do so.

Still, a Jedi can think through a great many things in advance, to better maintain the principles of the Code when the rest of the universe is in a hurry. Over the millennia since the founding of the Order, Jedi Masters have recognized that there are nine concepts a Jedi should embrace before situations are thrust upon him. A Jedi who understands these nine concepts will, when called upon to make a quick decision, already know the answer.

> “Jedi should spend time meditating each day on the will of the Force. The reason for this is simple: If one has unwittingly acted contrary to the will of the Force, recognizing the mistake soon after may still give one time to make amends.”
>
> —Master Odan-Urr

What Master Odan-Urr left unsaid was that by regularly examining one’s own motivations, a Jedi could be certain that she was not allowing emotion, ignorance, or passion to cloud her clarity. A Jedi who has no time to meditate can more easily become lost. More to the point, a Jedi who refuses to meditate may already know that her motivations were not pure, and is thus lying to herself. As Master Yoda once said: “The Jedi who heeds not the counsel of the Force, to the dark side listens.”

### Training
“A Jedi’s training in the Force never ends.” —Master Vodo Siosk-Baas

A wise Jedi should strive to remember that there is always something more to learn about the Force. The Force reveals itself to those who have the desire and knowledge to see it, and merely heeding the Force's will is much the same as looking at a bantha’s toe and saying: “Now I understand banthas.” To continue to grow, a Jedi should train each day.

### Loyalty
Jedi can exist in this universe because the Force exists. But the Jedi Order needs more: It requires loyalty. It goes without saying that Jedi should be loyal to one another. They should not squabble or fight. More important, though, each Jedi should be aware that he must act in accordance with the wishes of his Master, who must in turn act in accordance with the wishes of the Jedi council. This is not a question of seniority, but rather of understanding the will of the Force, and in this regard, the members of the Jedi council are the recognized experts.

### Integrity
A Jedi's responsibility to the Force is to be honest with himself. So long as the Jedi does not act in his own interest and observes the Code, he is obeying the will of the Force.

Master Odan-Urr lamented the misperceptions of those who believed that Jedi should be morally superior: “Many feel that a Jedi should be scrupulously honest, never taking advantage, and never withholding information. This is nonsense.

A Jedi can and should offer advice to those who need it. From a certain point of view, a Jedi is not being dishonest if he allows people to believe what they wish to believe. It is not incumbent upon the Jedi to convince anyone to follow his advice.

<!-- page 179 -->

> **Force and Your Character**
>
> There are three Force-user classes in the game: Force adept, Jedi consular, and Jedi guardian. A member of one of the other classes can decide to have a certain level of attunement to the Force by selecting the Force-Sensitive feat. In fact, if a member of a non-Force-using class wants to later multiclass into a Force-using class, that character must already possess the Force-Sensitive feat.
>
> All hero characters (including yours), whether or not they possess the Force-Sensitive feat, get to use Force Points to help them accomplish important tasks. See Force Points on the next page for more details.
>
> A Force-using character can select Force skills, provided the character has the prerequisite Force feats that grant access to those skills. The Force feats that provide the training necessary to learn and use Force skills are Control, Sense, and Alter. These basic Force feats also allow a character to learn additional Force feats over time.

When a Jedi is serving the Force, he may employ deception, subterfuge, misdirection, and even fraud, if he does so with a righteous aim. Although most sentient beings have a distaste for such practices, the Force is without such emotions,

Do not confuse this with “moral flexibility.” A Jedi does what needs to be done. But also remember that a Jedi is not above the law,

## Morality

The most dangerous—and debated—words ever uttered by a Jedi Master are: “A Jedi is not a creature of morals.” This statement has unfortunately been translated, often by Jedi, to mean that a Jedi can do no wrong.

What it actually means is that Jedi are not enforcers of morality. While Jedi can bring or restore order and justice, they cannot themselves sit in judgment of others. There are two reasons for this.

First, the galaxy is a vast place, full of cultures that no one Jedi can completely understand. One famous story tells how a Jedi learned that a companion had been devoured by the carnivorous Colicoids. When asked why the Jedi later bargained with the very same beings for starship components, she responded: “Because eating the flesh of sentient beings is not forbidden by the Jedi Code—but to the Colicoids, nor eating the flesh of sentient beings is considered a sign of insanity

This Jedi recognized that punishing the Colicoids for following their nature would be acting out of emotion and ignorance. Similarly, not procuring a badly needed engine part would have been punishing herself out of guilt.

The second reason is that judgment leads to vengeance and vengeance leads to the dark side, This is easy to under stand, though not so easy to practice. Should a known murderer be allowed to go free? Should a man intent on murder be killed? To answer either question, a Jedi must first know the will of the Force. Neither decision can be made hastily, except when lives are threatened by inaction.

At the same time, while not judges, Jedi can be mediators. It is a role they are suited for, and one that works in accord with the Force, since mediation leads to balance.

Discretion “The galaxy will live in tranquility if certain matters arei bit overlooked or left unheard.”

—Master Odan-tit

Though Master Odan-Urr believed in justice, he also understood that it was sometimes necessary for a Jedi to practice discretion. Some have seen this as a sign of J partisanship, Others, particularly law enforcement agencies, believe that Jedi ignore small crimes in order to apprehend greater criminals. Obviously, neither of these assertions is true.

The truth is that Jedi Knights are suffered throughout the galaxy—despite their facility with the Force. This is because they do not actively interfere with the lives of the common people. Jedi stand for order and justice, and these qualities do not begin with the misdeeds of the few. The goal of the Jedi should be to create and preserve an atmosphere where justice can flourish, rather than to try to create justice themselves.

Master Yoda often said that, should the Republic ever challenge the Jedi Order's right to exist, the support of the common citizen would see them through: “If fear us they do, help us they will not. If hate us they do, hunt us they will.”

## Bravery

“To be brave in battle proves nothing. Bravery itself proves nothing. A Jedi should be prepared to put aside fear, regret, and uncertainty and either fight, run, surrender, or die.” —Master Odan-Urr

Younger Jedi commonly and mistakenly define bravery as the opposite of fear. Since fear leads to the dark side, they reason, bravery is armor against the dark side. This isn’t so. If a Jedi is mindful of the will of the Force, he will know whether it is best to stand his ground, or flee, or even to offer a truce. Remember that bravery itself is an emotion, and a Jedi should be at peace—even in the midst of war.

### Fighting
“If a Jedi ignites his lightsaber, he must be ready to take a life. If he is not so prepared, he must keep his weapon at his side.” —Master Odan-Urr

Conflict is a fact of life in the galaxy for far too many beings, and no Jedi can hope to remain apart from it. But a Jedi need not embrace conflict. As Master Yoda teaches: “If a weapon you show, ‘A warrior am I!’ you say.” So, to avoid unnecessary fighting, a Jedi should not advertise his skill.

<!-- page 180 -->

But when is it necessary to fight? The Force will show a Jedi when he has no other options, and a wise Jedi trusts the Force in this regard.

When fighting, is it necessary to use one's lightsaber? The answer is no. A lightsaber is an intimidating weapon—it is not a tool for intimidation. This is what Odan-Urr meant. Do not use a lightsaber to create fear in an opponent. Use it to end the fight as quickly and mercifully as possible. If this means destroying a foe, so be it. But if a Jedi can end a fight without killing an opponent, so much the better. The best Jedi can avert injury altogether, with only a word.

In the past, some Jedi have taken this to mean that they should carry a second, less deadly weapon. There is no such thing: If a weapon cannot kill, it is not truly a weapon.

While a blaster can let a Jedi attack from a distance, it is less effective—and more in keeping with the Jedi Code—to use the Force instead.

### Independence
“Do not come to rely on the Force to the detriment of your other senses and abilities.”

—Master Odan-Urr

While not part of Odan-Urr’s Jedi Code commentary, this bit of wisdom from the Jedi Master is often added to any instruction using his words and methods. It warns Jedi students to develop their other talents and abilities, to not rely solely on the Force. To use the Force to accomplish every mundane task is to trivialize it. Using the Force isn’t the only solution to every problem; sometimes it isn’t even the best solution. That’s where a Jedi’s other skills and talents come in. Jedi training consists of many exercises; mastering the Force is only a part of that training. The student also learns to run, jump, climb, fight, swim, and think. These exercises could be made easier by using the Force, but this would be to the detriment of the Jedi’s overall experience. A Jedi needs to learn his capabilities without the Force so that he can truly know himself and also understand what those without the Force are capable of accomplishing.

Using the Force because it’s convenient, even when other methods might be more sensible, falls dangerously close to the dark side. It’s only one step removed from using the Force to achieve personal wealth and power, and that’s definitely a corruption of the Force.

## Force Points

Force Points represent a character's knack for using the Force to aid her actions. For a Force-sensitive character, it represents a conscious decision to call upon the Force for assistance. Characters without the Force-Sensitive feat don't consciously realize that the Force is aiding their actions, only that they are trying hard to succeed.

## Gaining Force Points

Every beginning character starts play with 1 Force Point.

Characters who don't possess the Force-Sensitive feat may not have more than 5 Force Points. Any points gained in excess of this number are lost.

A character who selects the Force-Sensitive feat gains 1 bonus Force Point and may collect an unlimited number of Force Points as time goes on.

A character gains additional Force Points in two ways.

G Each time a character gains a level, he gains 1 Force Point.

G Each time a character performs an act of dramatic heroism, he gains 1 Force Point.

Dramatic Heroism To qualify as an act of dramatic heroism, an action must fulfill three criteria.

- It must accomplish a significant task in the defense of
  good or the defeat of evil.

- It must occur at a dramatically appropriate time
{usually the climax of an adventure).

G It should require significant risk on the part of the hero.

Examples of dramatic heroism from the Star Wars movies include the defeat of Darth Maul by Obi-Wan Kenobi, the destruction of the Death Stars, and the defeat of the Emperor. Heroic acts that weren't necessarily dramatically heroic include Anakin’s victory at the Boonta Eve Podrace, the escape from Hoth, and the slaying of the rancor beneath Jabba’s palace.

Not every game session (or adventure) will have a dramatically heroic moment, and not every hero will have an opportunity to act dramatically heroic on every mission.

<!-- page 181 -->

Over the long run, however, such opportunities should be relatively equal between heroes.

Instead of gaining 1 Force Point for performing a dramatically heroic act, the hero can eliminate 1 Dark Side Point, if he or she has one (see Atoning, page 182).

## Calling upon the Force

When a character with the Force-Sensitive feat spends a Force Point, the player must declare whether his character is calling upon the light side or the dark side of the Force (characters without the Force-Sensitive feat don't make this declaration). In general, the game assumes that most heroes rely on the light side to aid them; however, a character may choose to call upon the dark side. In most cases, this is done out of desperation or anger; however, some individuals learn to rely on this power—that is, until it controls them.

In game terms, a Force Point is spent to add one or more bonus dice to all task resolution die rolls (rolls made using a 20) the character makes for 1 full round {including attack rolls, skill checks, ability checks, and saving throws, but not damage rolls). The decision to use a Force Point (and which side of the Force to call on if the character possesses the Force-Sensitive feat) is made during a character's action, after the die roll but before any results are revealed. The effects of spending a Force Point last until just before the character's next action, and may influence saving throws or other checks required during that time. Only 1 Force Point may be spent in a round.

The number of bonus dice added depends on the character’s level, his Force-sensitive status, and (if Force-sensitive)

whether he calls upon the light side or the dark side of the Force for aid.

**Table: Force Point Bonus Dice by Character Level**

| Level | Non-Force-Sensitive | Light Side | Dark Side |
|-------|---------------------|------------|-----------|
| 1st–3rd | `1d6` | `1d6` | `2d6` |
| 4th–6th | `1d6` | `2d6` | `3d6` |
| 7th–9th | `2d6` | `3d6` | `4d6` |
| 10th–12th | `2d6` | `4d6` | `4d6` |
| 13th–15th | `3d6` | `5d6` | `4d6` |
| 16th–18th | `3d6` | `6d6` | `5d6` |
| 19th–20th | `4d6` | `7d6` | `5d6` |

Note that the quantity of bonus dice depends only on the character's level and Force-sensitive status when the Force Point is spent, not when it is gained. You don't need to keep track of when a character gains Force Points.

## The Dark Side

The Force has two aspects, one light and one dark. The dark side lurks in the shadows, whispering to Force-users, tempting them with quick and easy access to power. While seemingly stronger, the dark side is only easier. It consists of the destructive impulses of all living beings. Anger, fear, hatred, and aggression are expressions of the dark side, and such emotions can quickly lead a Forceuser down the dark side’s corrupting path. Early on in her training, a Force-user finds that the dark side greatly enhances her abilities. After a time, the dark side fails to

<!-- page 182 -->

respond as quickly, and it demands more and more of hose in its embrace.

Dark Side Points measure the corrupting influence of the lark side of the Force. These points gauge a character’s fevotion—consciously or otherwise—to the dark side.

## Gaining Dark Side Points

Most players don’t want their Jedi characters to slip over to the dark side of the Force. For this reason, the GM and the players should discuss how strict the campaign is going to be regarding Dark Side Points. If you want a campaign where all the heroes must constantly strive against the lure of the dark side, then the GM should award Dark Side Points for even the most minor transgressions. If you want a campaign where the heroes have more room to explore options, or if you don’t want slipping to the dark side to be a major theme of the campaign, then the GM should consider handing out Dark Side Points only for the most common or major transgressions.

As an example, the GM of a “high heroism” campaign might give heroes Dark Side Points for striking first in combat, for killing an opponent in self-defense, or for not rendering assistance to someone in need. Conversely, the “high adventure” campaign might hand out Dark Side Points only for calling on the dark side when using a Force Point or for using a dark side skill.

A character gains Dark Side Points in three ways.

- Using a Force Point to call upon the dark side.
- Using a dark side Force-based skill or feat.
- Performing an evil act.

When a character spends a Force Point to call upon the dark side and thereby increase his chance of success, he gains a Dark Side Point. This occurs regardless of the task being attempted with the Force Point, the success or failure of that task, or the hero’s intent in attempting that action.

A character gains a Dark Side Point by using a dark side Force-based skill or feat. Such skills and feats include Drain Energy, Fear, Force Grip, Force Lightning, and Rage.

A character gains a Dark Side Point by performing an evil act, such as killing an innocent being, causing unnecessary or gratuitous injury, or using the Force while angry or hateful. The Gamemaster is encouraged to remind characters of the repercussions of taking such an action (“You know, killing that prisoner would be an evil act”), particularly when dealing with inexperienced players.

All three of the above conditions are cumulative with one another. A character who spends a Force Point to call upon the dark side to use a dark side Force power to perform an evil act would gain 3 Dark Side Points.

## Dark Side Transgressions

Use the considerations detailed below as guidelines for whether or not to award a Dark Side Point. The guidelines are separated by degree: major transgressions are acts that definitely deserve a Dark Side Point; common transgressions are acts that probably deserve a Dark Side Point; and minor transgressions are acts that could be considered dark but probably don't deserve a Dark Side Point.

**Major Transgression—Using the Dark Side:** This is a clear-cut situation. The character calls upon the dark side when using a Force Point, or uses a dark side Force skill. In either case, the player has announced that he is taking a Dark Side Point for his character.

**Major Transgression—Performing a Blatantly Evil Act:** There's some room for argument concerning the definition of evil, but it certainly encompasses the following acts, all of which are deserving of a Dark Side Point.

- A character deliberately kills or injures a character who
  hasn't done anything wrong.

GA character deliberately kills or injures another character who has done something wrong but has asked to be allowed to make reparations or to be granted a trial by his peers, or deliberately allows such a character to be killed or injured.

Major Transgression—Using the Force in Anger: Using the Force in anger or hatred is bad, but this can be hard to enforce. It’s difficult to determine the emotion a character is experiencing. The GM should award a Dark Side Point in these situations only when the player specifically states that his character is feeling fear, anger, hatred, pride, jealousy, greed, vengeance, and so forth.

Common Transgression—Using the Force to Cause Harm: Many uses of the Force are not overtly of the dark side, but they can be harmful or even fatal in their applications. When a Force skill that isn’t specifically of the dark

> **Dark Side Points and Non-Force Characters**
>
> Most of the examples and discussions in this chapter concerning the dark side apply to characters with the Force-Sensitive feat and, usually, at least one level in a Force-using class. It
makes sense, however, to award Dark Side Points to all heroic characters and keep track of them for two reasons.

First, if a hero picks up the Force-Sensitive feat later, the Dark Side Points that he or she has accumulated immediately apply. Second, even without the Force-Sensitive feat, the number of Dark Side Points a character possesses indicates that character's relative tendency toward evil. Even the most honorable, good-hearted hero can rack up a Dark Side Point or two over the course of a few adventures, but the more Dark Side Points a character accumulates, the more the character reveals himself as a servant of evil.

When a character gains a number of Dark Side Points equal to or greater than half his Wisdom score, he can definitely be considered a bad guy. He’s more than willing to look out for himself first, rob an old Ithorian in the street, or kick a Jawa just because he can.

When a character gains a number of Dark Side Points equal to or greater than her Wisdom score, that character can definitely be considered Evil with a capital “E.” When you see a GM character with a Wisdom score of 12 and a Dark Side Point total of 14, you know that that character has committed completely to the path of darkness.

7 _ q

<!-- page 183 -->

side is used to harm living beings, the GM should seriously consider giving the character a Dark Side Point.

Common Transgression—Performing a Questionably Evil Act: Some acts, while seemingly cruel, aren't necessarily evil. The GM should consider the intent behind the action before deciding to award a Dark Side Point.

For example, it may be a transgression to deliberately kill or injure (or allow someone else to kill or injure) a character who you know has done evil acts and has shown no remorse, but who is otherwise helpless.

Common Transgression—Acting While Experiencing a Negative Emotion: A character experiencing a negative emotion but who doesn’t use the Force at that time can still eam a Dark Side Point by acting on the negative emotions. The GM should only award a Dark Side Point in cases when a player specifically states what the character is feeling.

Minor Transgression—Performing a Dubiously Evil Act: The morality of some acts can be considered only slightly evil. Award a Dark Side Point only when the act is out of proportion to the situation. In most cases, the GM shouldn't award the Dark Side Point, but should remember the incident to determine if the character has a unconscious cruel streak. For example, a hero who kills an opponent in combat while ignoring opportunities to end the situation without the loss of life might deserve a Dark Side Point, though a specific situation might not appear quite so clear-cut.

Minor Transgression—Using the Force to Cause Inconvenience: A character who uses his Force powers to cause problems for innocent people might earn a Dark Side Point, unless the GM determines that the character is acting in a good cause. Qui-Gon Jinn, for example, might have earned a Dark Side Point for using the Force to cheat Watto. But the GM can decide that Qui-Gon was only trying to complete his mission and deliver Queen Amidala safely to Coruscant.

## Dark Side Characters

At first, it may seem that the dark side is an easy path to power. Eventually, however, those who depend on the power of the dark side of the Force fall victim to it. A character achieves the distinction of falling to the dark side in two stages: tainted and dark.

When a character's number of Dark Side Points equals one-half his Wisdom score (rounded down), he is considered to be tainted. A tainted character is in danger of being lost to the dark side. He has begun to walk its path and taste the seductive power it offers. Such a character gains a +2 dark side bonus on any Force skill checks made to use darkside Force skills, but takes a -4 penalty on any Force skill checks made to use light-side Force skills,

Thereafter, each time the hero gains a Dark Side Point he must make a Wisdom check (DC 10 + the number of Dark Side Points possessed). If he fails this check, or when his number of Dark Side Points equals or exceeds his Wisdom score, he is considered to be dark.

> **Wookiees and the Dark Side**
>
> Wookiee Force-users don’t gain Dark Side Points for following their natural tendencies and using the Wookiee rage species ability.
>
> They do receive a Dark Side Point, however, if they incorporate Wookiee rage with any of their Force skills.
>
> In addition, while in a Wookiee rage, a Wookiee Force-user can’t call upon the Force (except for calling upon the dark side when using a Force Point). All other uses of the Force require more calm and peace than the Wookiee can manage while in the natural frenzy.

He is now effectively lost He is now effectively los to the dark side. A dark side character gains a +4 dark side bonus on any Force skill checks made to use a dark-side Force skill. He takes a −8 penalty on any Force skill checks made to use light-side Force skills. Any Force Points spent by a dark character automatically call upon the dark side of the Force.

### Atoning
A tainted character tempts fate with each appeal to the dark side, but also has the option of working his way back to the light through heroic deeds, the use of Force Points, and by atoning for past misdeeds. A dark character’s only path back to the light is to accomplish a truly epic act of heroism against the dark and in the service of the light.

Effectively, the tainted character accomplishes this by reducing his number of Dark Side Points to one less than one-half his Wisdom score. A tainted hero can elect to decrease his number of Dark Side Points (in essence, erasing the points) by sacrificing Force Points specifically to do so. Each Force Point sacrificed in this manner reduces the hero’s Dark Side Points by 1. This form of atonement represents a period of meditation, reflection, and absolution on the part of the character. If desired by the player and GM, this can be worked into the campaign as part of an adventure, but it isn’t necessary. It can occur between adventures.

In addition, an act of dramatic heroism by the character—if performed without calling upon the dark side—reduces the character's number of Dark Side Points by 1. When dramatic heroism is used in this fashion, no Force Point is gained (see below).

A dark character can't rid himself of Dark Side Points by atoning. Such a character's only option is an act of dramatic heroism (see below).

## Dramatic Heroism

A dark character may, attempt to turn away from the dark side by performing an act of dramatic heroism without calling upon the dark side of the Force. Such an act should require extreme personal cost, be made in a selfless manner, and provide a significant benefit to the galactic balance. This act of dramatic heroism does not gain the character a Force Point.

<!-- page 184 -->

Darth Vader performed such an act of dramatic heroism at the end of Return of the Jedi when he sacrificed his own life to save his son and destroy the Emperor. Kyp Durron (in the expanded Star Wars universe) performed a similar act of dramatic heroism by destroying the Sun Crusher, a super-weapon prototype.

If the GM accepts the act as being appropriately heroic, dramatic, and selfless, the character's Dark Side Point total is reduced to one less than one-half of the character's Wisdom score, rounded down. In addition, the dark side exacts a final toll by drawing away all of the character's Force Points. Now, with no Force Points and a dangerous number of Dark Side Points remaining, the character must strive to walk the path of the light side and atone to remove any remaining Dark Side Points.

## Long-Term Dark Side Effects

While the dark side offers a quick path to power, it also extracts a heavy toll from those who use it frequently. As time goes by and characters grow stronger in the dark side, they subsequently experience a physical deterioration—a darksider's body withers and fails as it is corrupted and rotted away by the dark, evil power coursing through it.

Whenever a tainted Force-using character gains a new character level, he or she must check to see if the corruption of the dark side has had a permanent, lasting effect. To do this, the character makes a Fortitude saving throw (DC 5 + the number of Dark Side Points possessed at the time of advancement). If the save succeeds, the character manages to stave off the debilitating effects of the dark side for another level. If the save fails, the character permanently loses 1 point of Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution. The player chooses which ability point is lost, but no ability can be reduced by this means twice in succession (at each of two different levels).

For a dark Force-using character, the Fortitude saving throw has a DC of 10 + the number of Dark Side Points possessed at the time of advancement. If the save succeeds, there is no loss. If the save fails, the character permanently loses 1 point of Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution, as described above.

If a tainted or dark character eventually finds redemption, any ability decreases due to the corruption of the dark side remain. The only way to offset these losses is with an ability score increase, as described on Table 3-1: Experience and Level-Dependent Benefits (page 36).

## Final Option

As a GM, you may decide that you want to run a completely epic campaign. In this case, you can rule that once a Force-using character becomes dark, that character becomes a GM character and is no longer under the control of the player. Consider this option carefully before utilizing it, because it takes away player freedom. However, if the GM sets this rule in place at the start of a campaign, then it becomes part of the rules and everyone is aware of the consequences of walking down the dark path.

